this segment is going to be about tech
similarity text ability is one of the
applications of linguistics and
statistics to natural language
processing and it helps in many
different applications there are many
ways in which people can express the
same concept or related concepts for
example we can say the plane leaves at
12 p.m. but we can also say the flight
departs at noon except for the words
like the a nap the rest of the words and
the sentences are very different in yet
they express the exact same meaning as I
mentioned earlier at TechSoup light is
one of the key components of natural
language processing for example in an
information retrieval task if the user
is looking for information about cats we
may want the system to return documents
that mention the world kittens and not
the word cat so the document may not
have any words in common with the query
and still be related because cat and
kitten are similar words another example
is if the user is looking for
information about a food desert we may
want the NRP system to return documents
about peach tarts or Apple cobblers in
each of those examples we have a
specific fruit and a specific dessert
but both of those items are special
cases of food desert
another example is about a speech
recognition system for example if I want
to fly to Dulles Airport sometimes the
system may hear me incorrectly and
figure out that I want to go to Dallas
and it may put me on the wrong flight
however if a system knows in advance
that Dulles and Dallas are sound very
similar it may tweak its algorithm so
that if it picks up one of those two it
may ask me to confirm if I didn't mean
the other one it doesn't need to do this
for names of cities that are not so
similar so for exactly five ask about
Dulles it's never going to ask me do you
really mean San Francisco so in this
segment of this lecture I'm going to
teach you how text similarity can be
modeled computationally let's start
first with some human judgments of
similarity I'm showing you here an
example from a paper by Finkelstein at
all for 2002 where they asked people to
determine how similar two words are so
they gave them words like tiger and
tiger
and obviously they got to the maximum
similarity score from the human judges
in this case ten out of ten
then they gave them tiger and cat and
they got a similarity of an average of
7.35 book and paper had a similarity of
about the same range computer and
keyboard also about seven point five now
some other examples playing in car had a
similarity of five point seven cucumber
and potato had a similarity of 5.92 one
interesting thing is that the variance
of those scores was actually pretty high
so clearly there was not much user
agreement whether certain two words are
very similar or less similar but they
still agreed generally about the overall
level of similarity so one other example
is from a more recent paper was just
published in 2014 by Felix Hill at all
it has a much larger data set with 999
words all kinds of parts of speech
including adjectives verbs nouns and
adverbs
for example they figure that delightful
and wonderful are very similar with the
similarity of 8.60 five out of ten
whereas modest and flexible were not
similar at all their similarity being
only 0.93 you can look at some of the
examples on the slide just stop one of
them argue and persuade were moderately
related 6.33 similarity versus pursue
and persuade which had a much lower
similarity of 3.17 so this kind of data
sets can be used to train natural
language systems and they can also be
used to evaluate systems that
automatically compute text similarity
one movies an example is by McAuliffe at
all in the paper published in 2013 he
uses the word to Veck approach which I'm
going to talk about later and he was
able to compute automatically the words
that are most similar to France based on
the context in which they appear those
words are shown in the table so not
surprisingly the words that are most
similar to find
our countries that are near France
geographically Spain Belgium the
Netherlands Italy Switzerland and so on
now let me describe the different kinds
of text similarity that exist the first
kind is morphological similarity we have
two words such as respect and respectful
that have the same stem but then they
have a some additional morphological
change in this particular example the
word respectful is an adjective derived
from respect and the suffix fool tells
us that it's an adjective but the two
words are morphologically very similar
they share pretty much the same meaning
the next example is spelling similarity
it can be useful for example in dealing
with different versions of dialects of
English for example in British and
American English the word theater can be
spelled either with an ER at the end or
ar e so we want a system to understand
that those are pretty much the same word
because they look very similar and they
follow a very specific pattern of
changes that appears across those
languages synonymy is when two words
have very similar meanings it's very
rare for towards to have exactly the
same meaning but it is usually enough
for there to be close enough to be
considered synonyms so talkative and
chatty are synonyms another category of
similarity in text is homophony
that's when you have multiple words that
have possibly different meanings but
have the same pronunciation so raised RA
is e raised Raz and also raised as RA YS
all of those are pronounced the same way
we can also have different kinds of
semantic similarity for example cat and
tabby are semantically related because
the word tab is usually used to refer to
a specific kind of cat specific color
cat they can also be similarities among
sentences for example two sentences may
paraphrase each other and we can have
also simulated the level of documents
for example two news stories reported
independently on the same event we often
have
very similar content and I would also
like to add an additional example of
similarity that namely cost lingual
similarity for example the word for
Japan in Japanese is Nihon so sometimes
the name of an organization may be
translated Nihon or Japan depending on
who does the translation we want to be
able to identify that those refer to the
same country so in the next segment
we're going to talk specifically about
morphological similarity and stomach